            Plant Fact Sheet  

 

BALSAM FIR 

Abies balsamea (L.) P. Mill. 

Plant Symbol = ABBA 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program 

Needles are 3/4 to 1 inch long, flat, and often 
strongly curved.  Twigs with needles have a generally 
flattened appearance.  Both male and female flowers 
are found on the same branch.  Cones are 2 to 4 
inches long, purplish in color, and stand erect on 
branches (as do those of all true firs).  There are 
about 60,000 seeds in a pound.  The bark is smooth, 
thin, and grayish, distinguished by soft blisters 
containing a clear, odiferous resin known as 
Canadian balsam. 

Adaptation and Distribution 
The soils on which balsam fir grows range from silt 
loams developed from lake deposits to stony loams 
derived from glacial till.  Fir will grow, but 
comparatively slowly, on gravelly sands and in peat 
bogs.  It grows on soils of pH ranging from 4.0 to 
6.0.  It is generally found in areas with a cold moist 
climate and with 30 inches or more of annual 
precipitation.  Fir is subject to windthrow, especially 
on shallow wet soils.  Because of its thin bark, 
shallow root system, and flammable needles, balsam 
fir is easily killed by fire. 
 
Balsam fir is distributed throughout the Northeast and 
upper Midwest.  For a current distribution map, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment 
The use of natural regeneration methods for balsam 
fir is very effective on open and disturbed sites  
(heavily cut areas), but an adequate seed source must 
exist.  This species can also be readily grown in 
nurseries, for transplanting to abandoned fields, 
Christmas tree plantations, and open areas.  Use 
conventional tree planting techniques and equipment.  
Three or four year old seedling stock should be 
utilized. 

Management 
This section is under development.  Please consult 
the Related Web Sites links on the PLANTS Plant 
Profile. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Although most available seedlings of balsam fir are 
of unknown parentage, some are produced from local 
selections. 

 

 

 

 

 

Alternate Names 
Pinus balsamea L. 

 
Robert H. Mohlenbrock 
USDA NRCS 1995 Northeast Wetland Flora 
@ USDA NRCS PLANTS 

 

Uses 
Balsam fir is used primarily for Christmas trees and 
pulpwood, although some lumber is produced from it 
in New England and the Lake States.  The wood is 
light in weight, low in bending and compressive 
strength, moderately limber, soft, and low in 
resistance to shock. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
Balsam fir is a small to medium sized coniferous tree.  
Growth occurs in whorls of branches surrounding an 
upright leader or terminal, making a symmetrical tree 
with a broad base and narrow top.  It is relatively 
short-lived and is considered a sub-climax type 
species in the New England states, but may be a 
climax type in the zone below timberline. 

 

 

 

 

 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 

Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 

31Jan2002 JLK; 24may06jsp 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.  

 

 
'\\''
